---
  title: Annotated Bibliography
  category: research
---
[“Adequate Iron In A Vegan World.” Running & Fitnews 30.4 (2012): 22-26. Academic Search Complete. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a2h&AN=80139320&site=ehost-live){:target="_blank"}

An informative article in Running & FitNews warned vegan athletes that they are more likely to have low levels of iron compared to meat eating athletes because iron from animal sources, also known as heme iron, is absorbed up to three times quicker than iron from plant sources, or non-heme iron. The author stresses the importance of consuming an adequate amount of iron-rich foods by noting, “the body cannot manufacture its own iron and is dependent on food intake” (2). For this reason, it may require additional work for people getting their iron exclusively from plants to reach healthy iron levels. People may need more iron based on their age, sex, and levels of activity. Iron stores can be depleted though sweat, urine, and for females, menstruation. Children are in need of a lot of iron because their rate of growth is so quick. Young female athlete are especially prone to iron deficiencies because of iron loss through sweating during training and blood loss during menstruation. Vegans fall under the umbrella of people who have decreased iron intake or absorption. According to the list of foods along with their iron amount the author provides, it is not because animal sources always have more iron, it is because iron from animal sources are better absorbed than iron from plant sources. The author lists white beans, lentils, and spinach all as having higher iron than lamb, shrimp, and ground beef. Fortunately for vegans, there are ways one can increase the absorption of non-heme iron without eating a single piece of meat. When eating plant sources of iron, the meal should always be paired with foods high in vitamin C, such as a glass of orange juice. There are also food pairings that one should avoid too. Coffee, tea, and calcium-rich beverages, like milk, will inhibit the body’s ability to absorb iron. Some people with iron deficiencies may not exhibit symptoms. For this reason, according to the author, “it is important to screen for too little iron among high risk groups” (4). Symptoms typical won’t show up until a condition called anemia occurs. Anemia is a result of too little hemoglobin, a protein that is responsible for delivering oxygen through the body. Feelings of weakness, decreased performance, and unsteady body temperature may all be signs of iron deficiency anemia.

I included this informative article because it goes in depth about a serious limitation with the vegan diet for athletes. Iron deficiency can be detrimental to performance and it a serious issue to consider before switching to veganism.

[Asprey, Dave. “Athletic Anti-Nutrition: What a Vegan Diet Really Did for Carl Lewis.” Bulletproof. 29 Feb. 2012. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](https://www.bulletproofexec.com/carl-lewis-vegan/){:target="_blank"}

In his blog piece for Bulletproof, Dave Asprey discusses the topic of athletes who perform on a vegan diet and specifically focuses on olympian Carl Lewis. Lewis was a dominate sprinter and long jumper in the 80’s and early 90’s. His quote, saying that the first year of his vegan diet was his best year ever is frequently quoted in as what Asprey refers to as “vegan propaganda” (Asprey), in many articles. Asprey points out the fact that although Lewis claims his best year was the year after his new journey as a vegan, he was a much better athlete before the switch. While Asprey acknowledges that there is a multitude of potential reasons for Lewis’ decline, he offers his own theory instead. Asprey claims that the body does not perform as well on a vegan diet, but the symptoms are not recognizable until a period after someone starts the diet. He calls this phenomenon the “vegan trap” and defines it as “…the unfortunate fact that what is a fundamentally unhealthy diet makes you feel good for a time longer than 40 days” (Asprey). The vegan trap is used to offer a reason why Lewis’ performance declined after his switch to veganism. Lewis may have felt great after the initial switch and then when his body started to recognize the nutrient deficiencies, Lewis ignored the possibility that it was his diet causing the problems. Asprey continues to elaborate on his theory by explaining the sort of deficiencies Lewis likely had and what other vegan athletes may run into in the future. First is protein. Although it is possible to get a sufficient amount of protein on a vegan diet, according to Asprey, this is not usually the case. He also mentions creatine, which is especially useful in sprint athletes. Lastly, Asprey touches on vitamin B12, “80% of long term vegans are deficient in vitamin B12” (Asprey). Vitamin B12 deficiency affects mental function which would lead to a decline in physical performance.

I liked this blog post by Dave Asprey because of his strong opinion against a vegan diet for athletes. Finding articles against vegan diets for athletes was surprising difficult, which makes this article very refreshing.

[Beck, Leslie. "Can Vegan Athletes Still Build Muscle and Compete in Sports?" The Globe and Mail. 6 Oct. 2014. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/health-and-fitness/health/can-vegan-athletes-still-build-muscle-and-compete-in-sports/article20945720/){:target="_blank"}

There are many things to think about for athletes who are considering making the switch to a vegan diet. The first thing that may come to mind is whether or not an athlete can build muscle on an eating regime that completely cuts out meat, dairy, and eggs. Leslie Beck, a registered dietitian and regular contributor to CTV News Channel believes vegan athletes absolutely can build muscle. She focuses mainly on the amount of calories and protein athletes will need and how this may be difficult after the switch. Since vegetables are so calorically dense, they often have a small amount of calories compared to the amount of weight and space they take up. This can be great when one’s goal is to lose weight, but to gain weight, the athlete must have an excess amount of calories. Beck recommends monitoring one’s weight and “if you find you’re losing weight, you may not be eating enough calories to meet the demands of your exercise training” (Beck). Another important factor to consider is getting enough protein. According to Beck, for every kilogram the athlete weighs, they should eat a little over one gram of protein. This is different than the non athlete vegan who only needs to eat around 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight. Among some other concerns are amino acids, iron, vitamin B12, and vitamin D. Beck notes that “animal proteins contain all essential amino acids in sufficient amounts to support muscle building and repair” (Beck), thus it is important to mix up the plant sources of amino acids to get the necessary amount. Proper iron levels can also be reached by eating enough plant foods that are rich in iron. Unlike amino acids and iron however is vitamin B12 and vitamin D. The athlete may consider to take supplements if they feel they are lacking these vitamins which can be especially tough to get without eating meat.

This article is important because it specifically addresses the worry that vegan athletes may not be able to build muscle. It is also important that is mentions the necessary changes a vegan needs to make to be equal with a meat eating counterpart. A lot of the advice like getting the full range of nutrients are things I did’t consider before reading the article.

[Brazier, Brendan. "The High Performance Vegan Athlete: It Is Possible!" VegKitchen. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.vegkitchen.com/nutrition/vegan-athlete/){:target="_blank"}

In this contribution piece for VegKitchen, Brendan Brazier helps newly converted vegan athletes stick with their diet. This article is important because Brazier is able to not only diagnose some problems vegan athletes may face but he also offers solutions to the problems. Many articles I read mentioned deficiencies with vegan diet, here Brazier gives example symptoms of these deficiencies and how to fix these problems.

[Brazier, Brendan. Thrive: The Vegan Nutrition Guide to Optimal Performance in Sports and Life. Philadelphia, Pa.: Da Capo/Lifelong :, 2008. Print.](http://www.amazon.com/Thrive-Nutrition-Optimal-Performance-Sports/dp/0738212547){:target="_blank"}

In his book Thrive: The Vegan Nutrition Guide to Optimal Performance in Sports and Life, Brendan Brazier discusses his transformation from omnivore to vegan and the improvements to athletic performance a vegan diet can make on the body. Brazier is a professional cyclist and used diet and nutrition to look for an edge to beating his opponents. Brazier explains the original intent behind his vegan conversion by saying, “if I was able to recover from each workout faster, I would be able to schedule them closer together and therefore train more than my competition” (Brazier 3). Brazier’s initial motivation for becoming a vegan was unlike most. He did not do so out of the need to because of a special connection to animals, rather he sought out an optimal diet to help speed up recovery time, and through a long process of trial and error, he came up with “The Thrive Diet” which has its foundation laid in veganism. Brazier discovered a positive side effect of his diet that also contributes to better athletic performance. He eventually realized that his new diet was also reducing the amount of stress on his body. Brazier mentions that “obesity, fatigue, poor digestion, and trouble sleeping are all symptoms of stress” (Brazier 5). He uses this new discovery to connect to the fact that the vegan diet is not only beneficial for athletes looking to cut down recovery time, but it is beneficial for everyone.

If anyone is the poster child for the vegan athlete campaign, it is Brendan Brazier. He is an amazing athlete with many accomplishments and is proof that not only can vegan athletes compete at the top level, but can rise above the competition.

[CivilNet TV. "Who is the Vegan Badass? Meet Strongman Patrik Baboumian." Online video clip. YouTube. YouTube, 5 Nov. 2013. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fmrYsXjwlTg&spfreload=10){:target="_blank"}

Patrik Baboumian is a record breaking strongman competitor. Strongman is a series of strength tests which lifters undergo and compete against one another to lift the most weight. Another fact about Baboumian is that he is also a vegan. His choice to become vegan was inspired by his compassion towards animals, and ultimately he decided to cut out meat because he couldn’t eat meat without seeing the animal that was killed to feed him. Baboumian describes this experience by saying, “suddenly the piece of meat had a face for me” (Baboumian). He is also a big promoter of the vegan lifestyle. He stressed the fact that eating meat and dairy products are not scientifically proven to be necessary items to be strong. He experienced this first hand when he decided to become a vegetarian, then later a vegan. According to Baboumian, his performance actually improved since changing his diet. “My numbers went up, my recovery got better” (Baboumian). Baboumian is also writing a book to share his experience as a vegan strength athlete with the world. His career is an impressive one. He mentions in the interview how he was unsure if he could compete as a strongman because is was slightly undersized. However, he continued to become stronger and after becoming the champion in the lightweight division, he eventually moved onto the heavyweight division where he broke the world record for the most weight carried by a human.

I enjoyed this interview because it changed my perception of the typical vegan body type. Patrik Baboumian is a very large man who clearly is getting enough calories and protein to build a huge amount of functional muscle, which a lot of articles mentioned as a main concern.

[Finn, Adharanand. "Olympic Vegetarians: The Elite Athletes Who Shun Meat." The Guardian. 30 July 2012. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/jul/30/lizzie-armitstead-vegetarian-athletes-olympics-2012){:target="_blank"}

This article by Adharanand Finn uses vegetarian athlete Lizze Armitstead’s olympic victory as a segue into the continued success of vegan and vegetarian athletes rising to the top of their sports. I included this article because it was real with the fact that being a vegetarian athlete is more difficult but can be achieved without sacrificing athletic ability.

[Forbes-Ewan, Chris. "Effect of Vegetarian Diets on Performance in Strength Sports." Effect of Vegetarian Diets on Performance in Strength Sports. Sportscience, 1 Jan. 2002. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.sportsci.org/jour/0201/cf-e.htm#_Toc13380492){:target="_blank"}

This scholarly article helped me narrow down the subject I want to focus on. Initially I wanted to study whether vegan or omnivore is better for athletic performance, but I learned that there may be a difference between endurance athletes and strength athletes when it comes to diet. This article also showed that there may not be enough information currently to know whether or not a vegan diet is better for athletes than a typical omnivore diet.

[Pilon, Mary. "Sculptured by Weights and a Strict Vegan Diet." The New York Times. The New York Times, 4 Jan. 2012. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/05/sports/vegans-muscle-their-way-into-bodybuilding.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0){:target="_blank"}

After reading many articles on the vegan athletes, developing strength and muscle was one of the biggest criticisms due to the lack of creatine in plant based food. This article spotlights raw vegan bodybuilder Jimi Sitko and how animals products are not necessary to build a sufficient amount of muscle.

["Vegetarianism: A Winning Formula for Athletes." PETA Vegetarianism A Winning Formula for Athletes Comments. Web. 16 Feb. 2015.](http://www.peta.org/features/vegetarian-athletes/){:target="_blank"}

This opinion piece from PETA recognizes the necessary nutrients for vegan athletes as well as pointed out some of the flaws that comes with eating animals products. This article is important because it uses a variety of top athletes, from both endurance and strength sports to show that a vegan diet is a viable if not preferable diet for the athlete who is looking to be the best in their field.
